---
title: "A new protocol for social interaction "
author: Mikel Lindsaar
date: 2010-09-18
layout: home
redirect_from:
  - /2010/9/18/a_new_protocol_for_social_interaction
  - /2010/9/19/a_new_protocol_for_social_interaction
---
In [What is a Distributed Social Network](/posts/2010-09-17-what-is-a-distributed-social-network)
I discussed the bubbling horrors of having our online identity
controlled by faceless mega-corporations. But it didn't really provide
any useful direction. This is my attempt to fill that gap. Specifically,
how should we go about sharing our thoughts and emotions online, without
having to give up the ownership of our data to a centralised body? These
are my thoughts.

I think there are four central tenants which any information sharing
protocol should subscribe to.

These are;

1.  Ownership of data should belong to those the data is of.
2.  Authenticity of data should be ascribed by the owners of data.
3.  Durability of data should be as long as the owners please.
4.  Sharing of data should not circumvent the first three principles.

When a protocol for information sharing be developed that guarantees the
above four rules, then we will have social networks without an ever
present demon of profitability and balance sheets hovering over us.

But let me take a moment to explain what the above four rules would
mean.

### 1. Ownership of Data

Your information is yours. This is where Diaspora are generally on
target, despite any other failings. You should be able to post
information to some location, somewhere in the world, and have complete
control over that data. At no time should it be possible for someone (or
something) else to claim rights to your data.

This flies in the face of the [Facebook privacy
agreement](http://www.facebook.com/policy.php). Go read it if you
haven't yet. At least skim through it. The only place where they mention
ownership of your data is the last paragraph of section 6, specifically
that they reserve the right to sell your data to whom ever buys them.

Awesome.

[Google's privacy policy](http://www.google.com/privacypolicy.html) also
has very little to say about ownership. In fact, it has nothing to say
about how much of your data you own. Which means you have nothing to say
about it using your data in whatever way it pleases.

The Apple's [iTunes privacy
policy](http://www.apple.com/legal/itunes/us/terms.html), that's right,
the one you click through every time there is an update to iTunes, also
has a glaring, sun-flare type lack of information ownership.

The crazy thing is, we all don't care. Or at least we have been
conditioned to not care.

With the seemingly endless stream of platitudes coming from the
mega-corporations murmuring that they will look after us, our
information is safe, they will only use it to help us; it is no wonder
that all of us don't care. But go back and have a look at all of those
"privacy policies". None of them say they will look after your data. In
fact ALL of them explicitly state that if they screw up and release all
your data, that you waive them of any liability.

So Ownership of data is king. And the only way to ensure ownership is,
well, have possession of it! There is a great old legal saying, harking
back to the early 1700s that states "Possession is nine points of the
law". Over the centuries since this has become "Ownership is nine tenths
of the law" and it is true!

So for you and me, the key would be for us is ownership data. Have
control of our own micro information nodes that store, backup but most
importantly, own our data.

Achieving this would be relatively simple, at least in the scale of the
other three items in my proposal. We would all own a micro server which
had our information crown jewels locked up some how. Each one of these
little islands of personal information would then hand out tidbits of
information to those that came, offering as much or as little as we
wanted, while at the same time stamping each byte of data with it's
stamp of authenticity.

### 2. Authenticity of Data

The next key point would be the owner's ability to say "Yes, this data
about me is correct". Maybe the second most important thing would be
preventing any one else from saying "This bit of data about that person
is authentic" without the owner agreeing.

Being able to authenticate that data belongs to you, grants you the
ability to revoke that authentication, but why is this important?

I touched on it in my last post, the ability (and natural right) of a
human to reinvent themselves, to start over, to become more than they
ever were. Without the ability to say "That is what I did before, sure,
but that is not me now. Now I am this." then I am not quite sure what
you or I are bothering to live for? As human beings we all have the
intrinsic ability to start a new life, turn over a new leaf and spin up
any number of clich√©s that allow us to change our demeanour.

But the current social networks don't allow that. USA President Obama
stated to a group of kids that they should [be careful what you post on
Facebook](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/09/08/obama-on-facebook-be-care_n_279482.html).
And he couldn't be more correct. Because once you post that, then
Facebook are the ones who are stating that information is true about
you. Not you.

Is it really fair to say that taking a video of someone being stupid at
age 17, and then posting this on Youtube, should then define that person
for the rest of their lives? No. Of course not. But you and I can see
it. It is there. In video. So it MUST be TRUE!

Says who?

Have you seen a hollywood movie lately? Avatar anyone? Can you seriously
tell me that if I took a clip from Avatar and decreased the resolution
to Internet standards, that you would be able to prove to me that it was
not live footage of an actual planet? No. Of course you couldn't. And
that is the point.

If we are to live in a sane and free world, then you and I should be
able to stamp information about ourselves as true. And other information
not. Then the viewer of that information could then (at their
discretion) validate that data with your server, getting a confirmation.

Now before you go off at me about the possible legal consequences of
people covering up their crimes by "deauthenticating data". Remember
people, we are talking about social networks. If the police want to
collect a file about your actions and prove that it was you who robbed
the bank, then fine, they can do that and the whole beyond reasonable
doubt thing.

But remember in the old days, if you really screwed up your life, you
could get up and move town and START AGAIN. This is the whole point. You
should be able to revoke information and start over. Information about
yourself should only exist for as long as you allow it to.

### 3. Durability of Data.

Go do a google search of your name. Don't do it as an ego trip, just do
it to be shocked (like I was). You will find information about you
posting to mailing lists that have stopped sending mail almost a decade
ago. You will find all sorts of information that you never thought would
be there. And maybe you find something that you don't want to be there.

This data exists as long as Google feels like persisting it. Not a
minute more. And more importantly, not a minute less.

Sure, you MIGHT be able to get hold of them and delete information from
caches and data stores. But they have no legal obligation to do as you
ask. And even if they wanted to, what profit is there in doing so? None.
Without keeping information about you and your actions, they have
nothing to offer any customer, period. Their whole business model is
defined by who did what when and allowing you to find out about it.

Now, don't get me wrong. Google has a place. It provides an incredible
research tool for our generation. When I was at school you actually had
to go to the library and lookup encyclopaedia if you wanted to see
information about a famous discovery. Now you can just google it. It is
incredible and provides us with unparalleled expansion of knowledge.

However, research data, and what you had for lunch, are two very
opposite ends of the information super highway. An information sharing
protocol should allow the owner of data to decide when data is no long
deemed necessary to be kept, and so allow it to be destroyed. Not made
"anonymous". Not "archived". Simply nuked.

If you want to keep some information around for the future generations,
print it out and store it in a air tight safe. If you want to start a
new life, format your information node, and start a new one.

Or, if you are happy with your life and what you are doing, keep it
online, and share it with your friends.

### 4. Sharing of Data.

The last point is probably the hardest to get right. Ownership can be
handled by having your own private server. Authenticity could be
resolved with todays public/private key authentication. Durability can
be handled with a combination of ownership and invalidating the
authenticity of data. But sharing, now that is tough.

Because the problem presents itself, whom do you share data with? And
why?

Does Facebook really need to know how old you are? I mean, sure, they
need to know you are of legal age to prostitute your personal life to
the Facebook gods, but do they need to know that in March I will be
celebrating yet another year of being on the far wrong side of 30? No.
Don't think so.

What about iTunes? Asking your date of birth "For security reasons"...
O.o

Right.

Being able to share your data would take concepts like OAuth to their
logical conclusion. Instead of allowing Google et al to be our
authentication "proxy", we would delegate this to our information nodes,
each allowing anyone to say "Hey Joe, this character is claiming to be
you, is he?" and get a definitive "yes" or "no".

The same information node could provide things like "Yes, my owner is
over 18" or "You want his postal address? One sec, I'll check."

There is little to no need for Facebook, iTunes or many other companies
to know where I personally live. They already have my credit card data,
what more do they need? They might need my postal address to send me an
invoice, sure. But anything else? Nope.

Providing a smart way to share data would provide us with the
opportunity to be so granular with our information sharing that the
existing corporate efforts would just be a proverbial bull in a china
shop.

And it would scare the life out of them.

Imagine if you will, Facebook trying to drum up more business when it
could not sell targeted ads, down to a suburb, for goods and services?
Imagine google only being able to shoot gun advertise? Imagine the
empowerment we would gain as a human collective, together, breaking free
of the psycho targeted marketing campaigns that assault us daily?

Nice thoughts aren't they?

So being able to share data in a controlled and defined manner is just
as important as the other three combined.

### Summary

So these are my thoughts and my views of a future social information
sharing protocol. What do you think?

I hope I have delineated them sufficiently.

If you feel strongly about it, please spread the word. This sort of
discussion needs more voices than mine. I intend to work on such a
protocol, I have no idea how or where such work will take me, but I
really think that personal information needs to be under the above four
tenets; Ownership, Authentication, Durability and Sharing.

Simple really.

blogLater

Mikel Lindsaar
