---
title: "Tip #10 - The Ruby Language"
author: Mikel Lindsaar
date: 2008-04-17
layout: home
redirect_from:
  - /2008/4/17/tip-10-the-ruby-language
---
Learning Rails is hard enough without also facing the task of learning
Ruby at the same time. Here I go over some of the must knows in Ruby so
that you get some basic understanding of how to do Rails.

This is part of my 8-Part tip-a-thon on the [Must Know Facets of Ruby on
Rails](https://lindsaar.net/2008/4/17/tip-8-how-learn-ruby-on-rails).
If you haven't already, please read the first part and then come forward
(there is a link at the bottom of each article that links to the next)

#### Learning Ruby

**Ruby is fun.**

You have probably heard that, you have also probably heard that Rails is
fun. Both are true.

But there is nothing fun about tearing your hair out online trying to
figure out why a piece of code doesn't work, especially if you can't
even read the code!

So Learning Ruby is probably *the* most important step to becomming a
Ruby on Rails developer.

But how do you do that?

Well, this is how I did it.

##### Read... --- LOTS

If you don't already own the [Pickaxe](http://pragprog.com/titles/ruby),
then you should go and get it. If you are just looking to see if Ruby is
for you, then maybe you could read the online edition of [Version 1 of
the Pickaxe](http://www.rubycentral.com/pickaxe/). It is older, but
contains enough information and is current enough to be worthwhile. Ruby
hasn't changed *that* much since the version 1 and all the basic
concepts are the same.

You can read through \_why's (who is basically Ruby's mad scientist)
[Poignant Guide to Ruby](http://poignantguide.net/) on learning Ruby. I
must admit, I tried, I did... but it lost me about the time the
Fox/Dog/Crazy thin dude lost is truck and someone had stolen it...
you'll need to have a look and read to see what I mean :)

There are many other fine Ruby books out there as well. I can also
recommend the O'Rielly book, mainly because it has a different approach
to the Pickaxe and gives you a different view of the same problem.

If you read through these books, and do the examples (the Pickaxe is
good for this as you build a Jukebox as you go!) you will get some good
basic understandings about how Ruby ticks.

##### Use Ruby Everywhere you Can

This is a key one. When you are first learning Ruby, and you need to do
something outside of Rails that could use a bit of shell scripting or
some basic programming, use Ruby!

There is pretty much no task that Ruby can't handle. I have used it to
parse incomming emails, used it to merge CSV files together and also
used it to clean up bad code points in a supposed unicode file.

I have even used it to help handle someone attacking one of our servers.

Once you decide you can use Ruby, go for it and learn all the little
tricks inside of that big box called the standard library. There is so
much in there that you can use and you will be surprised at how many
tools you have at your disposal.

##### Practice with a different paradigm

Ruby on Rails is one use for Ruby and a very exact use. But following on
from the previous point, try Ruby in different paradigms.

What do I mean? Well, make a server in Ruby that serves messages of any
type over a network stack. Make a program that searches your hard drive
for files, make something that plays some music. Really, anything.

When I did this I found that my understand of how Ruby on Rails works
expanded a huge amount. Rails is just one medium sized Ruby program that
handles routing, talks to your database and allows you to serve up web
pages. Once you know how all the Ruby stuff fits together, you will
understand Rails a lot more.

##### Next Up

Next in the series is the [HTML and HTTP are Your
Friends](https://lindsaar.net/2008/4/21/tip-12-html-and-http-are-your-friends)

blogLater

Mikel
