---
title: "Tip #23 - Know your fundamentals"
author: Mikel Lindsaar
date: 2008-06-20
layout: post
redirect_from:
  - /2008/6/20/tip-23-know-your-fundamentals
---
You would expect any professional to know their stuff, for a Ruby on
Rails beginner, this is no less important.

One of the things I run into quite a bit is people simply not knowing
enough about the underlying model of their database. Getting them to
understand a has many through object relationship, is not going to get
very far if they don't know how an SQL database represents this.

Basics are what will make or break you as a programmer. You can know all
the syntactic sugary beliefs out there, but without some hard won
understanding of basic principles, you will be out in the cold as soon
as some part of the program breaks in a new and unusual way.

Each subject has it's basic fundamentals. For my Ruby programming, the
fundamentals are defined in several key books (like the Pickaxe and the
Ruby Programming Language and Design Patterns in Ruby). For Rails, you
can't really go past Agile Development and the Rails Way for key points.
Each of these become like a 'Bible' to you when you are coding. Each
programmer has their bible, it is interesting even that it is called a
Bible, as in Christianity, the fundamentals of that belief system is
contained in a book CALLED the Bible. My religion has a set of books
that contain our core beliefs, we call them collectively, '[The
Basics](http://www.bridgepub.com/list/index.html').

But a lot of Rails folks in their misguided 'coding SQL is evil' forget
that underneath all that pretty ActiveRecord sugar are real, cold
blooded, raw, writing SQL queries, automagically generated by our core
team friends to attempt to leach from our databases the data we and our
application so desperately need.

It's all well and good to be able to type 'person.phones' and get an
array containing all the phone numbers belonging to that person, but if
you don't know that in executing that statement, that an equivalent SQL
query approximating "SELECT \* phones WHERE person_id = 2;" is occuring,
you my friend are in for some nasty surprises.

Just like me when I first discovered the has many through, I promptly
made a call like paragraph.chapter.book.genre.words and wondered why my
DB came to a screeching, painful halt, and my ruby instance blew
straight through the available RAM and started playing friendly with my
swap space... I did not understand what all those queries were doing and
did not thinking with the size of the resulting dataset. The LEFT OUTER
JOINS came to bite me... quite hard.

But SQL is a dry subject, not
[DRY](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don't_repeat_yourself) that is, far
from it actually, more like a moist sponge, but it is dry in that most
of the materials you have to learn it are bland and quite factually
boring.

But I found this book online, it has been around for a bit, I am not the
first to discover it, but it is an introduction to SQL that I think
almost any Rails developer should read. It covers the basics, where
RDBMS's came from, why you need two apostrophes to get one and how using
SQL will get you better dates.

So I thoroughly recommend it. Head over to [SQL for Web
Nerds](http://philip.greenspun.com/sql/) and have a good read.

blogLater

Mikel

